The next exercise that we wanna tackle,
it's gonna be a little
bit of a change of pace.
Hopefully, that'll be a good thing.
We're gonna mess around with a few
things that you may not be super
familiar with messing around with,
specifically the DOM API.
Most people these days only
work with these frameworks
that have heavily abstracted
away working with things.
We're actually going to work
with the direct DOM API here.
So, hopefully that doesn't
scare you too much.
This exercise is chessboard diagonals.
Again, there's the link for the repo.
Hopefully, you have that cloned and
changed to the start here branch.
What we're going to be doing is
dealing with a chessboard and
specifically highlighting the diagonals
when you click on a particular tile.
So if I were to click on
any particular tile here,
I want you to know that
there are actually.
Two diagonals that any square on
the chessboard participates in,
and some of you are probably chest fans.
From the chess world, there's actually
a name for these two diagonals.
So, the diagonal that starts on the top
left and works to the bottom right,
if it goes in that direction,
that's called a major diagonal.
And you'll note as I'm kinda doing my
mouse cursor here to illustrate as
a pointer here, you'll notice that
this diagonal is going from top left
to top right that there are 15 of them,
if you count them out.
This square right here is a diagonal
that only has one square in it.
This one has two squares in it.
This one has three squares in it and
so on.
So, those top left to bottom right
diagonals are called the major diagonals.
And then we have another 15
diagonals going the other direction,
which are the minor diagonals going
from the top right to the bottom left.
So this one's a top right,
this one's on top right.
This one with three white squares
in it as a top is a minor.
This one's another minor.
So we have another 15 of
those minor diagonals.
So any square that you click on or put
a piece on, if you will, in a chessboard,
for example, the queen, you put
a queen on any square on the board,
and there are two diagonals, one major and
one minor that that piece can move on.
In our case, we're gonna just be
highlighting these diagonals as
you click on them, much like you
might do if you were clicking to show
all of the places that a bishop or
a queen could move on a chessboard.
Make sense?
All right, so what we're going
to do is we're going to think
about what is the conceptual basis for
how we're going to solve this?
In other words, what is the mental
model that we're going to create for
the chessboard that we're then
going to translate into code?
Can anybody suggest a data structure that
might be used to represent a chessboard?
This is not a trick question.
A two-dimensional array, right?
That might be what the people in
the chatroom were about to say, Mark.
A two-dimensional array seems
like a fairly reasonable
first assumption at a data structure.
We have columns going across here and
rows going across here and
you can have an array of rows, or
you could have an array of columns.
And the columns could have elements in
them, but either way you could represent
a two-dimensional grid as a matrix,
as a two-dimensional array.
Since that's the most natural thing and
also since we need to
ask ourselves how are we going to
draw a chess board on our webpage,
and there's a heavy emphasis on child
elements being inside of parent elements,
there's a hierarchical grid
structure just implied by
the way the DOM elements
are gonna sit on our page.
So that seems like a place to start.
Everybody agree with that?
We're gonna see that may be is
not the best data structure for
our problem but we're gonna start
there and then work our way forward.
So, at any given point on this chessboard,
we'll come back to the diagram.
So let's go ahead and
take a look at some of the code and
orient ourselves to that and then we'll
look at some of these diagrams here.
You're gonna have an index.html and
you'll notice that we have a div id for
the board, but
there's nothing in it yet and
it has a little to-do that
says remove the text,
so you should go ahead and remove
the text just like I did just there.
But the reason that to-do comment was
there is because it reminds us that
we need to write code to
fill in those elements.
Whatever elements are going to
be used to represent the board,
we need to fill in those elements and that
will be part of what we need to implement.
If we look at the chessboard module,
which is where we're gonna be doing all of
our coding, we won't be making changes.
Other than that little change to
index.html, we won't change the CSS or
the app.js.
But we do have a draw function here and
indeed that's where we're going to
write the code that creates
eight rows of eight tiles each.
We're gonna use divs inside of divs.
Nothing fancy, no,
there's not a chessboard element and
we're not gonna make
a custom element here.
So we're just gonna make
divs inside of divs.
Now, what are we gonna do to
make it colored in the way that
a chessboard is colored?
If I come back to this diagram, you'll
note that we have an alternating pattern
on the first row that just goes white,
black, white, black, white, black.
So you might think, well, if I just create
it and it's an eight by eight chessboard
so there's 64 elements, you might just
think what if I just created 64 divs and
have them alternating odd, even, odd,
even, white, black, white, black.
Does anybody spot a problem
with that approach?
>> That's going to be some
gnarly CSS to keep them alive.
>> Potentially, but the biggest problem Is
that when we get to the eighth element,
and then we get to the ninth element,
they are both black.
And then this element and
this element are both white.
So what we have is an alternation not
only across a row, but across columns.
We have an odd even
relationship in the columns and
an odd even relationship in the rows.
It turns out there is actually a pretty
straightforward trick to doing this in
CSS and you don't have to write any CSS,
I've already written the CSS for you.
But it turns out that if we simply do
eight rows of eight elements each rather
than doing all 64 and letting them just
sort of float into the grid or whatever.
If we did eight rows of eight divs each,
we can target the row individually
with a CSS index selector,
and then target each tile
inside of it individually.
And so we'll be able to very easily,
with one CSS rule,
create this alternating pattern.
So, all we really need to do, since I've
already done the work of writing that CSS,
we just simply need to create eight divs,
one for each row, and then,
inside of each row, create eight divs for
the columns, and the CSS will do the rest.
If we go and look at that code, just so
in case you're curious, here's the trick.
We use the nth-child selector.
So you notice this first div is
the row cuz that's the direct
descendant of the board is the row.
And what I'm saying, is the 2n divs and
we'll come back to that in just a moment.
And then for all of those rows,
we wanna target the 2n+1 cells or tiles.
And we wanna target the 2n+1 rows at
the position 2n in the tile.
That's what we're saying here,
so this is a compound selector.
For any of those make them block,
the rest of them leave white, okay?
Quick little note on this 2n thing and
being of course the indexing,
the counting of the child elements.
But here's a little trick that
you may not know about CSS.
CSS is 1-based not 0-based,
so whereas we might think
of 2n is being even or
2n+1 as being odd,
it's actually different.
So we're targeting the odd row and
the even tile, and
the even row and the odd tile.
It's kind of a,
just got to keep straight the whole n is
1-based in CSS that always trips me up.
I don't know if it trips anybody else up.
Okay.
But that CSS selector,
if we create those divs,
the CSS selectors are gonna do
the coloring for us, which is great.
So, all we need to do is write that code.
Now here's where I promised that we
were gonna actually spend a little bit
of effort in native DOM work.
First thing I wanna do is I'm gonna need,
and it'll become obvious later why,
I'm gonna need to keep
a reference to the board EL,
the DOM element that is
the parent element for our board.
That's being passed into the draw
function, and I need to save that off.
So I'm gonna say, very first thing,
origBoardEL = boardEL.
To construct eight rows
of eight tiles each,
the most straightforward way
of doing this is two loops.
I loop nested inside of another loop.
We're not gonna do anything more
complicated than let i equal 0,
i less than or equal to 7, i++.
Quick little note here,
since I'm using less than or equal to 7,
we know that this is
going to do 8 iterations.
I actually think this is a little bit
more semantic because it shows the eight.
Some people like the less than or equal
and then the number because they they
don't like it to think about
it as beyond the bounds.
But I just think the eight kind of
communicates, so you can do less than or
equal to seven or
less than eight, whichever one.
It's gonna do the same
number of iterations.
But just from a code
communication perspective,
I like being able to see eight there.
I would for example use a constant for
this I might say something like,
NUM-ROWS = 8, and
then I would wanna use that NUM-ROWS there
I wouldn't wanna do NUM-ROWS minus one,
if I what I'm saying.
So to me, that's a little bit of a more
semantic signal to use the eight.
I'm gonna leave off the constants
just to keep a little less
code that we're digging into,
but you get the point there.
Okay, so
our nested loop i being the row index and
j will make us the,
We're good algorithmists,
we like to use single letter variables for
everything.
We'll use better variable names elsewhere,
but for right now,
we'll just use i and j for
row and tile index, I think.
Column index, tile index,
those will be interchangeable for us.
Okay, so we need to create a div.
Some of you have never done this before,
but document.createElement("div").
It's not quite as cool looking as JSX,
but it gets the job done.
JSX compiles to document.createElement,
so it's the same thing.
We also need a real element.
I neglected to do that one.
For each row, we're gonna need
to create a parent row element.
So, let's go back and do that.
Same way, row elements and tile element.
What do we do with a tile element?
We append it to the parent row element.
So we do rowEl.appendChild(titleEl).
And after we've appended all of
the tile elements to a row element,
what do we do with the row element
we append it to the board element.
Let's switch over to the browser.
I've got a web server
running on this code.
And when I refresh, boom,
there's our chess board.
One other thing to note is that our
chessboard isn't clickable yet,
but it will be clickable
when we write our code.
So the idea of this is
that I come along here and
I click one of these, and
that's when it should highlight.